
What is the LeSS framework?

LeSS is a framework for scaling scrum to multiple teams who work together on a single product. It starts with a foundation of one scrum team, as defined by Ken Schwaber and Jeff Sutherland in the Scrum Guide, and applies to multiple teams who work together on one product. 

This is further refined in the book Large-Scale Scrum: More with LeSS, by Craig Larman and Bas Vodde. The authors condensed their years of experience to define LeSS as a framework to deliver value while reducing complexity and waste.

The LeSS framework seeks to apply the principles and ideals of scrum in a large-scale enterprise context as simply as possible through defined rules and guides. Its simplicity has earned LeSS the label of being a barely sufficient framework, but thats not meant to cast it in a negative light.
The LeSS framework structure

LeSS was forged through more than 600 experiments that involved expanding the practice of scrum, which at the time was thought to only support small, colocated groups. The LeSS experiments, guides, frameworks, and principles were created to support the needs of larger numbers of teams. In addition, LeSS rules were later released to better define and provide guidance on how to implement and execute LeSS and offer guides for adoption.
Principles, frameworks, guides, and experiments
Principles

LeSS defines 10 principles for applying the value, elements, and overall purpose of scrum across an enterprise. They help create more responsible teams with greater customer focus and collaboration. Teams focus on learning, transparency, and delivering customer-centric values that product organizations need to remain competitive and responsive. Heres the complete list:  

    Large-Scale Scrum is scrum
    Empirical process control
    Transparency
    More with less
    Whole product focus
    Customer-centric
    Continuous improvement towards perfection
    Systems thinking
    Lean thinking
    Queuing theory

